The beginning is always the hardest step, right? Whether it’s a plunge into a new hobby, skill, or any other thing worth learning, taking the first steps to make a dream into a reality is always the most challenging part. Hell, I experienced the same thing creating this website and writing this blog post. Starting is way too difficult. “*But why?*” I hear myself ask. And sure, one can chalk it up to getting out of a comfort zone, but that still doesn’t answer the question of why starting is so hard.

My answer is that it’s a barrier that leads to adaptation. The difficulty of taking one simple, basic action is a difference that can set two people worlds apart, even at the same starting point. A person who spends hours dreaming is a person wasting hours not doing. Because of that, I implore you to get up, walk away from whatever electronic device you may be viewing this on and take the first steps to whatever you’ve always wanted to do. I’m no researcher, I’ve got zero credibility, yet I still think that you should take action for the sake of your future.

I don’t know what can push you, or motivate you into doing things, but at the very least, I can give you a dreadful reassurance that waiting on it, procrastinating, or just plain being lazy isn’t going to contribute to whatever future you have in mind. And, that’s why I say the first step is a barrier that leads to adaption. It’s a brick wall that every person smashes into, but the ones that make it through and stay there reap the fruits of their labor. Yes, it’s uncomfortable, yes it’s different. But, that’s what makes it so great, that’s what makes it an adaptation.