The party line split is probably the only common factor among every political event for the last presidency. Political polarization and its exponential growth in the last decade has pitted Republicans and Democrats against each other in an uncooperative and unpractical manner. Gone are the days where we could see the majority leader work on legislation with the minority leader. A time when a president would sign a bill for the good of the country rather than an obsessive need to stay in line. Nowadays, this ever-growing partisanship is standard. The political average. But then again, why should it be? As political identities and respective parties have become ingrained in people’s very own identities, our shared political landscape suffers for it. I don’t give a damn if you’re a Democrat or a Republican, I just care about whether we can come to a consensus on an issue or policy, and then be able to think about proactive ways to resolve it. And therein lies the problem. We as a society have tied policy to party in an unfounded way.

Let’s take a quick look at the history of political parties in the United States to get some background for our modern-day situation. In an early and fragmented America, two parties rose up to take the lead after President Washington’s retirement. The Federalist Party and the Democratic-Republic Party founded by people who originally despised political factions. Alexander Hamilton and James Maddison wrote in their *Federalist Papers*, number 9 and 10 respectively, on how political factions tore down old republics and how they believed America would surpass them. Coincidentally, they would found the Federalist Party and Democratic-Republican Party, again respectively. And so began America’s history of being dominated by two factions. Sure, every so often one would change or beliefs might swap, but it always remained two. Like the Sith I guess? The Federalists, Democratic-Republicans, Whigs, Democrats, and Republics have been the only major names in American politics for 200 years. While there’s some independents or third parties, none of them ever gained large traction. Compare this to Canada, our neighbors up north. Right now, they’ve got 5 major parties with seats in Parliament. In all honesty, all of America just seems a little closed off. We’ve got no room for any other opinions, but it seems like both sides have gotten louder to compensate. This points to the growth and effects of political polarization and how it could end damaging our nation. As George Washington wrote in his farewell,

> “[Political parties are] to become potent engines, by which cunning, ambitious, and unprincipled men will be enabled to subvert the power of the people and to usurp for themselves the reins of government, destroying afterwards the very engines which have lifted them to unjust dominion”

But hey, the words of some old white people a few hundred years ago don't have a massive effect on us today. What does? The Overton window. To keep it simple, the window just means the range of acceptable dialogue on political, social, or economic issues. When the range is skewed to the left, socialistic tendencies and subsidization. To the right and more free-market dialogue, economically speaking at least. All the Overton window and its changing/moving represent is the current political landscape and what’s deemed possible or appropriate at the time. Go back to the 1600s and absolute monarchies and feudalism would’ve appeared within it. The Overton is not only based on what politicians do but mainly the public’s perception of ideas and policies. Proposals like Medicare for All, also known as single-payer healthcare systems, in the United States have gone from outside of the Overton window to widely supported and well within it. The question that many scholars and academics ask and research today is where the Overton window is heading, and it doesn’t seem like anyone has the right answer. “Radical” beliefs from both sides of the aisle have made it into the mainstream, so is the window stretching rather than shifting? Society has become so divided in recent times that the Overton window has pretty much shattered, all of which can be deeply attributed to growing polarization. Acceptable discourse has moved from the center, outwards. Extremes have become legitimized by our acting politicians and ever-changing demographics. President Trump has normalized racism and bigotry by sympathizing with white supremacists, while progressives have normalized the abolition of the police and pushed intersectionality to the forefront. 4 years ago, I would have never thought that this is where the discussion has fallen to. Though some people would argue that the window has shifted in either direction, it makes more sense for it simply to be shattered and done with. People might point to Bernie Sanders nearly winning the Democratic nomination or Trump… being Trump, but the fact that both of those have happened simultaneously means that America is being politically pulled apart.

So we’ve established that political polarization is evident and potentially harming discourse. Time to finish it up with even more bad effects and hopefully some solutions. Political polarization tears apart democracies. The expansion of the Overton window is not only representative of ever-expanding views, but ever-separating ones too. It culminates in a cyclical institution that perpetually blames the other side for malpractice, based on evidence or not. Instead of promoting discussion, polarization leads to prejudice and distance. The introduction of such cripples a democratic society. Polarization has already begun to segregate our society in the form of echo chambers and intellectual distancing from those with opposing views. Dropping friendships over political disagreements or having your social media feed full of the same repetitive bullshit are prime examples. This separation furthers the development of more extreme and radical views on both sides which causes the problem again. It’s a negative feedback loop that’s damaging all sides of the debate and making Americans less-wanting of debate and discussion. We’re constantly pushed by our friends, family, social channels, the way we get our news, to conform to certain ideas or frameworks of thinking. And sadly, most of us don’t think twice. The latest in a series of civil unrest events have proven to me that even when we can agree on issues, we can’t get them fixed. A remedy to the plague of polarization is discussion. As much as it hurts, pains, or even just annoys, talking is a way to pave bridges rather than destroy them. Everyone (hopefully) has a common goal in creating a better tomorrow, so why don’t we do exactly that? It all starts with making better relationships with more ideologically diverse people. Just because you disagree with someone doesn’t mean you can’t be friends with them, building relationships builds up society so much more than tearing them down. Put down the pitchforks to give a hug. As a country, we’ve experienced enough violence and bloodshed stemming from political polarization as a direct result of an isolated political system that inadequately represents its populace and incites hatred among us.
