What does it say about the state of our society when a large portion of the populous doesn’t believe in science? As the coronavirus ravages across America, [17% of the population disapproves of government health agencies’ responses](https://news.gallup.com/poll/300680/coronavirus-response-hospitals-rated-best-news-media-worst.aspx). On another topic, while only 8% of the population doesn’t believe in climate change, [the number of those who don’t believe it’s caused by human activity jumps to 32%](https://climatecommunication.yale.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Climate_Change_American_Mind_April_2019c.pdf). So, what has lead to our current state in which a sizable chunk of a fifth or more of our society doesn’t place creed and trust towards scientific institutions?

I think a large deal of these misunderstandings or flat-out scientific denial arises from the politicization of scientific research and consensus. Wearing a mask or knowing that the Earth is heating up at alarming rates don’t have to and shouldn’t be political subjects, but to some people they are. When one adds layers of unnecessary argumentation or discussion to scientific literature, the actual meaning of the authors gets diluted and misunderstood by general society. Who decided that scientific fact needed to be split among party lines, that agreeing or disagreeing with long-held observations by experts was a brave political statement? In all honesty, it’s bullshit. And, all of it doesn’t stand up to scrutiny, but as long as people will say ‘the other party believes it, so it can’t be true’, society is generally going to be held back by those false beliefs. The growing sense of cognitive dissonance among society, and especially today’s youth, only serves to create a less educated society and one that will fail to recognize its flaws. The increase of political polarization has further fueled the use of anti-intellectualism on both sides to increases their reputation and decrease the others.

The perceived champions of the common-folk ‘fighting’ against the academic establishment might make for a good story, but nothing more. Anti-intellectualism as it turns out tends to be a common trait of authoritarian and ultra-controlling regimes that want to snuff out the opposition by labeling their assertions as faulty. The way they execute their actions to misguide the public is through the use of media, propaganda, and mere exposure to convince people to remain in ignorance. From this, we can move on to how society was pushed towards this narrative, how science became taboo.

We live in a country where [35% of Americans cannot name a branch of our government](https://www.businessinsider.com/poll-many-americans-dont-know-basic-facts-about-government-2014-9). Where nearly [a third of us don’t know who our vice president is and a crazy 73%](https://www.newsweek.com/how-ignorant-are-americans-66053) who can’t name the justifications or explanations for the cold war, which only happened a little over 30 years ago. I think it’s fair to say America is a little uneducated if not flat out ignorant. Ignorance fuels polarization and the increased distancing from both of the parties creates a feedback loop of hatred and disagreement which negatively affects the public as we are swayed to both sides to such extremes. The failure of our education system to adequately treat political topics with appropriate neutrality and discussion combined with the propagandization of our information streams have co-opted the creation of a misinformed and anti-intellectual society.

Onto correction. Media reform and consumption are necessary factors, but they won’t do anything to those already looking in the wrong places for the wrong things. Fixing media portrayal of vaccines isn’t going to eliminate anti-vaxxers, they’ll just come up with another narrative not backed by evidence which makes media companies look bad. The solution is to focus on education. Only [28% of American adults are scientifically literate](https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2007/02/070218134322.htm#:~:text=Approximately%2028%20percent%20of%20American,1990s%2C%20according%20to%20Miller's%20research.), meaning about 3 quarters of our population has no goddamn clue how to read a paper or a study. To me, that’s bewildering. Those numbers are staggering and reveal deeper problems within our education system that has produced so many anti-intellectuals and people who are anti-science. Teach scientific literacy in high school. Educate people on history, sociology, and science and lead people to conclusions rather than forcing it down their throats. A lot of this sentiment comes from people who ‘don’t like the system’ but can’t put a pin on why. If we can teach people to come to conclusions on the basis of scientific thought, evidence, and research, society would be all the better because of it.
